we're in a position to bring you some
breaking news alaz sources say that
there are negotiations going on right
now mediated by Qatar on a ceasefire and
prisoner exchange deal that would be a
deal for an exchange of prisoners
between Hamas and Israel Ibrahim freat
is associate professor of conflict
resolution at the Doha Institute it's
good to have you with us on set to
discuss this if this happens still a big
if at this stage negotiations
ongoing but if this happens it would
obviously be
major it will be a huge breakthrough
depending however on the terms of the
ceasefire um and for how long is it
going to be a humanitarian ceasefire is
it going to be a temporary ceasefire is
it going to be an end of this war so
this we don't know yet and we don't have
a news any any of that what we know
however I'll add I'll add a little
something these negotiations can be
characterized right now we have to be
careful with the words we use based on
the sourcing and everything but they
they can be described as progressing the
negotiations are progressing and they're
currently at an advanced stage exactly
no matter what the terms are it's still
a huge breakthrough because we know that
there has been a very strong Israeli
rejection to any sort of ceasefire even
a humanitarian ceasefire even the
International Community the European
Union yesterday in the meeting was
calling for a humanitarian sees far and
they were a bit shy of even saying this
so there isn't any serious pressure on
Israel from the European Union and we
know that the US has said several days
now that a ceasefire in their view would
benefit Hamas and that's why the US has
been against one exactly um but
nevertheless Israel the United States
also they're so concerned about the
issue of the prisoners or the the
arrested Israelis with with Hamas um and
this is an important factor for for the
domestic level in the United States and
that's let's keep in mind that Dom in
the US and in Israel yes exactly and
let's keep in mind that the US the US
Administration Biden is approaching a
new election uh soon so this is the
domestic factor is very crucial um as
for the United States so there has been
some pressure from the US to on Israel
to delay the ground operation in order
to release the hostages um on that level
but um and we have seen some of that
impact actually though we don't know the
real reasons why Israel has not been uh
conducting the ground operations yet one
of the explanations that they're scared
of the results of what this will happen
and the impact on the again the Israeli
domestic level for the Israeli
government sorry go ahead yeah but but
again uh let's keep in mind that this is
an important uh development this is a
huge break breakthrough even for a short
term term uh but then we need to know if
this is going to continue to be a
temporary it's not going to benefit
Hamas a lot it's going actually to
benefit the US and it's going to benefit
Israel because this will give Israel a
free hand is to conduct more ground
operations or for a long time well there
are two things right that are being
discussed one is the ceasefire one is a
potential prisoner exchange now the ceas
fire we would have to know and we don't
at this stage whether again it's
temporary or permanent would it be the
first step to Wards ending the
bombardment and then some some
resolution to this uh conflict that we
just don't know that's still a question
mark the other uh thing that is being
discussed is a potential prisoner
exchange again there's a lot of
information we don't have but there's a
lot of context that's important and that
we do have when after Hamas carried out
its operation on October 7th there were
statements from Hamas saying we have
enough captives to free all the
Palestinians in uh Israeli jails we know
that you know these things have happened
before with gilad Shalit he was held
captive uh for 5 years and when he was
an Israeli soldier gach when he was um
released it was he was released in
exchange for more than a thousand
Palestinian
prisoners yeah um I think it's in my own
analysis it's still early to talk about
a prisoners exchange okay because this
is going to take a long time there are
6,000 approximately 6,000 Palestinian
prisoners in Israeli jail U so Hamas
announced many times that the time is
not Tri now uh for a prisoners exchange
and no prisoners exchange will happen
before the end of the Israeli War on
Gaza so I think so that's why these two
things are linked the EAS fire and the
and the talks about the prisoners so I
think we are talking probably more
likely on some some sort of um an
exchange with the civilian hostages with
Hamas not the because there are two
types of hostages with Hamas civilians
and Military so and there is high ranked
military Israeli military officials are
captives with with Hamas at the moment
also so probably at this moment we are
talking about ceasefire and along with
the U civilians uh hostages with Hamas
more than a total prisoners exchange
because this is would still be a huge
step and Israel has many many many vetos
on releasing um you know Palestinian
prisoners um you know for for the number
of like 10,000 6,000 sorry 6,000
prisoners so um again let's hope that
there is going to be a ceasefire it's
not going to be temporary and it's going
to take some time you know for this that
something can be built on such even if
it's temporary again I think it's still
a great progress because some something
can be built on later and also let's
keep in mind that the developments in
the region are not are not helping the
United States so there are some sort of
developments uh instability taking place
in Syria in in Iraq against American
American targets oh you think the wider
Regional context is something that might
that that might play into these
negotiations of course of course this is
the major pressure point on the us
Administration that the US
Administration does not made it so clear
from day one does not have time for that
us larger agenda is Ukraine Russia China
it's not this war and for that reason
the US finding itself is being pulled
into this they felt compelled they felt
compelled um to send two aircraft
carriers uh just going to remind our
viewers of this information on aljazera
that there are negotiations going on
right now at an advanced level mediated
by T this on a ceasefire in Gaza and a
potential exchange deal for prisoners
between Hamas and Israel that's what we
can report at this hour it is 1321